We can adapt H W Heinrich’s five domino model of accident causation
to visualise an IT incident cascading from a single causal event
Henrich imagined an incident to be the natural culmination of a series of events which occur in a fixed and logical order
He pictured these events as a row of standing dominoes,
aligned so that the fall of the first domino causes the fall of the entire row
For example, one event might be a gap in how the performance of our system is documented
Without adequate documentation for this part of the system, there is a risk of introducing a performance bug
If the performance bug is missed in the testing phase then it will be released to the live system
If enough users trigger the bug, then the system’s performance will degrade
If the system continues to deteriorate
then eventually the system will become unstable and there will be a widespread outage
Retracing this chain of events will lead us to the root cause